and the most remarkable thing about this
I think over the last 10 years has been
just the growth of this community and
the degree to which it's jazz across so
many different sectors people working in
sound people working in immersive media
generative art I mean that's been the
most gratifying thing about it and this
seems like it's a remarkable moment this
is a medium and a form that's really
defining itself this whole effort that
we've been doing this year and next on
immersive media storytelling in many
ways is growing very quickly you see it
getting recognized by investment in the
space and many artists working in it
when we started this the gray area
started at a little white box gallery
because we imagined this would all take
place on screens on the wall and then
you know we realized well actually it's
360 its immersive it could be anything
and we ended up in a theater so thank
you Josette for leading us into that and
this the other thing I want to mention
is that this is a this is a crossroads
not only among our community but there's
so many other partners and people who
are part of this festival who are doing
amazing things here and it's exciting to
see both San Francisco and grey cut it
as a nexus for the invention of this new
medium with us as a lead sponsor is
Verizon who got interested because as
they move towards 5g networks how is AR
and VR an immersive storytelling and
collaborative storytelling a part of the
future use of the network they're
interested in experimenting with us on
that a lot of the work we're doing at
immersive media has been supported by
the Knight Foundation they're supporting
our experimental research lab spatial
research lab because the question is can
these things be turned into properties
that artists can make money at that can
go on the road is this a form of
business just as gaming became a new
form of business meow wolf is with us
and they've had explosive growth and an
hour exploring how do these media move
out so this conference is really a nexus
of a lot of that NEA is here trying to
grow these new forms of media we have
the Goethe Institute that has been a big
pioneer and all of this creative capital
and the city of San Francisco and and to
me what's exciting is that that all of
these kind of four
are coming together to explore and
develop these new forms of median what
we're really trying to do here is then
think through how do you tell stories
with it and and help this explain and
help us work through a time of great
technological change another interesting
thing about the Bay Area or and about
the tech community is we often don't
have a sense of history we're so excited
about being present in the Church of
what's happening now that we often don't
look back and say did this happen before
what are the roots and as we started
preparing for this festival I remember a
few months ago and I was all excited
about the work that we were doing with
the knight Foundation and an immersive
media and I'd seen where as I managed to
come through here and then I ran into a
friend of mine who was a collaborator
who had worked with Andy Warhol 50 years
ago doing immersive media and I'm like
that happened and then he started
explaining to me about the extraordinary
community and ideas that were the
antecedents of what we were doing and I
thought that was amazing and I kind of
went on a journey to New York and then
to Portland Oregon to learn more about
it and I was in Europe kind of
understanding all that so I wanted to
share with you today a little of what I
ran into that was the path I'll switch
to this mic now so I call this mind
split open how Andy Warhol's 1966
intermedia explosion opened a wormhole
to now and you should know that by May
of 1966 Andy Warhol turned his attention
to bringing together every form of media
you could imagine and immersing
audiences in it
he hit the road with the Velvet
Underground and he was blasting images
everywhere and exposed explode exposing
a generation to the exploding plastic
inevitable now if you had been in this
production that he was creating the
experience was total there were five
film projector showing different reels
of the same film simultaneously and
there were a similar number of slide
projectors but those were moved by hand
so that the images could sweep the
auditorium there were four variable
speed strobe lights three moving spots
with an assortment of color gels there
were pistol lights and a mirror ball one
hanging from the ceiling and one rising
from the floor in addition to the band
there were three loudspeakers blaring
different pop records all at once
in 1966 now how do you explain that
you know whenever you bring out
something new in tech there's no frame
of reference how do you explain the
first first personal computer marketers
reverted to speeds and feeds and so
Warhol did this he spelled it out do you
want to dance and blow your mind with
ultra sounds we'll have movies there'll
be light works also slides our show
include visions and it will be all in
the same place at the same time this is
the classic product ad written by an
engineer who doesn't quite understand it
from the customers perspective but as
excited to share with you everything
that might be in there this was in March
of 1966 by Memorial Day the act moved
west and whatever it was six weeks later
in May that disaggregated list of
features was fully branded by the West
Coast psychedelic music scene as the
next big thing it emerged as pop up rock
with Warhol as the headliner with the
Velvet Underground and the Mothers of
Invention is kind of lower down now you
think this is the perfect match right
here's a set of ideas from one coast
it's come West to the Bay Area community
soon to be Silicon Valley and now those
ideas will scale but not quite see this
was San Francisco the year before the
Summer of Love Bill Graham had just
opened the film
this was his sixths performance and the
whole New York transmedia scene was a
bit too transgressive a bit too
aggressive for him so Graham's reaction
to all of this was you disgusting germs
from New York here we are trying to
clean up everything and you come out
here with your disgusting minds and
whips now the exploding plastic
inevitable which we now know is the
world's first deeply immersive media
experience was booked for three nights
at the Fillmore but on the second night
the band walked off the stage having
left their instruments against the
amplifiers creating a great bit of
feedback which Graham called the barrage
of sonic feedback and he nixed the third
act so here we had two cultures coming
together of Mary Woronov who was one of
the New York dancers characterized this
New York tech culture and the Bay Area
culture in year one before the summer of
loved the sleaze she said you know we
from New York we were on amphetamines
they were on acid
they were so slow to speak with those
wide-eyed oh wow so into their
vibrations we spoke rapid machine fire
they were homophobic we were homosexual
they were barefoot
we had platform boots they were eaten
bread they baked themselves and we never
ate at all okay Lou Reed from The Velvet
Underground returned this cultural favor
he said you know we have vast objections
to that whole San Francisco scene it's
tedious untalented they can't play you
you know people like Jefferson Airplane
of the Grateful Dead they're just the
most untalented group of people and just
look at them physically I mean can you
take Grace Slick seriously it's a joke I
tell you now even though these cultures
weren't mixing there was an important
legacy that was left behind
and it is that Warhol's lighting
engineer Danny Williams pioneered a lot
of the innovations that became part of
the Canon of the Fillmore and of rock
all of the all of the lighting and the
sound and the the strobes that whole
thing Graham kept while rejecting the
content side of things and it became
kind of part of the scene here now there
is a tradition of tension of one coast
punking the other when
comes to new media art at the first gray
area festival in 2015 the new york
collective free art and technology put
on a terrific retrospective here curated
by Lindsey Howard but mostly the New
York crew was pissed at the West Coast
crew because we had completely
commercialized and siloed internet
culture and they expressed this lament
with a giant portrait of Eric Schmidt
painted in okay they never actually told
us what medium they used to paint Eric
Schmidt but they had read Marshall
McLuhan and they knew that their medium
was gonna make the message stick on us a
gray area a TechCrunch explained this
thusly about the artist who made a
portrait of Schmidt in poop which by the
way we didn't know it was painted in
mayor there's other words for it until
TechCrunch was in front of us and then
they revealed well yes we painted this
in
so these tensions continue and
transgression always seems to be at the
root of these transmedia things um
there's actually a whole route that's
around democracy and if you've read Fred
Turner's the Democratic surround there's
an inclusive peace the New York group
was pioneering another one the
predecessor of the electric plastic
inevitable was launched by Warhol in New
York at a hotel ballroom and the New
York society for cynical psychiatry
there were part of graphic movies the
twenty four projectors The Velvet
Underground Nikko and to this one
astonished psychiatrist to the New York
Times when asked a question said to them
if you want to do something for mental
health kill the story okay but it turns
out that all of this was coming out of
the New York underground film scene and
that film scene was moving away from
traditional cinema and trying to explore
all sorts of new ways of telling stories
could cinema for example lose its linear
form and surround all of us with
multiple screens and multiple narratives
or perhaps no narratives at all this was
all part of the scene of moving away
from linear print culture into immersive
culture stuff that McLuhan called
acoustic space sheldon Renan who coined
the term American underground film
wanted to know could we explain
and cinema to the point where the
effective film might be produced without
film at all and in that same year 1966
this expanded arts diagram was created
that actually painted the whole
landscape so it starts in prehistory
with Byzantine iconic classism and now
moves into Fluxus theatre events it
connects up with acoustic theater with
John Cage immersive kinesthetic theater
expanded cinema and that also blasts
into things like international
expositions and Walt Disney spectacles
the the there's this whole theory that
they came from Fred Turner on the
Democratic surround on how the State
Department used this choice and cinema
choice of what you get to see to promote
democracy and then we have the more
transgressive stuff all the way up to
fantastic art and happenings there's a
whole conversation about happening so
all of this in 1966 and in and into all
this came a number of people how many
people here know Marshall McLuhan in the
1960s the author of understanding media
coined the term the medium is the
message and the global village he
understood a great deal of this and this
is actually seen from his book the
medium is the massage there you see the
electric plastic inevitable being
blasted there now I think McLuhan was
onto something that resonates today with
our mission here at grey area at a time
of great change it takes artists to help
understand where technology and media
are going and to distinguish fields from
ground and to experiment and understand
technology to push us beyond the product
boundaries into understanding what new
technologies mean and also when they
have social consequences to help us have
our dreams and nightmares and make sense
of these tools but please don't take my
word for it ladies and gentlemen to help
frame this year's gray area festival
please welcome Marshall McLuhan you're
understanding anything going on in your
own time or very small except through
the means or media you have provided by
artists artists are people who enjoy
living in the present
[Music]
since the time of the Renaissance
we have been contained by a visual
monopoly art was rigid and kept us
around afraid today
art is anything you can get away with
[Music]
when my own means way of testing the
sorts of effects that any new form is
likely to have on us is to keep a sharp
lookout on changing styles in the arts
the artist is always a jump ahead of
Technology and is engaged really in
giving you images of what sort of
effects it's likely to have upon you
later on The effect of the electric
revolution is to create once more an
involvement that is totally in the mid
60's this conversation was everywhere I
learned about it by talking to my friend
Jon Brockman who actually programmed and
created a lot of the electric plastic
inevitable because he was doing expanded
cinema for Lincoln Center back then
there's Brockman on the left with Warhol
and and Bob Dylan and Brockman was
telling me about all of the exciting
ideas that were coming in from artists
and from scientists into that firmament
Robert Rauschenberg brought in Norbert
Weiner
the founder of cybernetics John Cage
introduced the ideas of Claude Shannon
who created information theory and of
course here was Marshall McLuhan all of
these people were at work at the
founding moment of all of this and you
can see this in some of the reviews how
people were connecting art to technology
to its implications here for example
from the Detroit Free Press in 1966 a
review of this show have you ever
considered what your role in society
will be after the impending cybernetic
revolution when machines do all the
manual labor and computers run all the
machines that from 1966 66 was also the
year that the very first kind of virtual
reality headset got created this is Ivan
Sutherland Sutherlands work at the MIT
Lincoln Laboratory and it was vector
graphics but it was the first
exploration into all of this I asked
children Ranen who was part of this era
well is this where it started it started
MIT in 1966 he says no you have to take
it back to the Mazie conferences in the
1940s where scientists and artists came
together to consider the implications of
all of this I asked him is that when it
started Sheldon tells me it really goes
back to the invention of the telephone
the first time we realized we were
creating a global community and now fast
forward to today Warhol was obsessed
with creating art that fetishized
consumer culture and consumed with
producing media that consumes you so if
we fast forward to now his progeny
Instagram culture at the Museum of ice
cream here are consumers consuming
nothing and eager to pay for it
it's media and narrative deconstructed
and in many ways that creates our
opportunity here what are the ways we
can add story back to this well Mia
Wolfe is doing an amazing job of this
adding story and immersive media and and
they're expanding they raised a hundred
million dollars and they're now going to
expand into a space in Las Vegas a
quarter million square foot area 15
space it will be further expanding and
exploring all of these I was in Paris
recently at Lumia tell yeh Tulum yay a
space that is vast full of projection
and asking how do you reinterpret
traditional art here this week we've had
Inferno which as you may know because
it's back there audiences are clad in
these exoskeletons it's a machine
it's a it's a performance about
surrendering to a form of hell about
machines taking control the amazing
thing is yesterday when Louie Philippe
dimeric talked about it he said you know
we actually thought we were building a
work that would upset people but people
enjoyed being controlled we didn't
expect this we thought people would be
uncomfortable this is an interesting and
half a discovery we have to learn how to
deal with it and if you read all the
reviews that came out in the last few
weeks
people were just thrilled to submit and
see where they had control and where the
Machine had control it's kind of the
beginning of interspecies art or jazz
you can also see this in rhizome attics
and they were here earlier this year and
last year right this is a dance company
the dancers are outfitted with sensors
machine vision knows where they are an
avatar is created through machine
learning that they're reacting with in
the first part of the show humans lead
later on the machine leads but when so
many of our robot stories are about how
we're take
down this is actually about how
man-machine culture can lift us up
culturally enliven us and this story is
spreading thanks to all of you into our
great team at gray area my friend Maria
was going to work the other day and
there she wrote and she just tweeted
this out found this gem on the street
open to this very page in downtown San
Francisco today so we are sharing the
Machine held with people and you know
all of this stuff is coming together in
the experimental space research lab here
that the knight Foundation's funding and
write the whole reason behind this is
how can we tell meaningful stories
spread these ideas so that artists can
get paid and so this can become a medium
that's really what this beat week has
been all about it's interesting when we
started this the original thinking was
perhaps the topic of this year's
exploration should be dystopian things
like privacy or machine control but both
the artists and other people were
talking to us like no why don't we
explore something that's more the whole
system's view of the world so the theme
of the research lab is really rewording
living systems how can we experience
kinesthetically emotionally the systems
things that are driving climate change
and the connectedness of the world that
are important today in many ways this
brings us back to those 1960s thoughts
those 1960s thinkers people like
Buckminster Fuller and EF shoemaker they
were considering how do you build a more
connected holistic world the artists
were beginning to experience that now we
live in time when that's essential
because of the nature of the world the
nature of climate change and so all that
stuff comes together in these
explorations but with a very strong debt
of gratitude to our to our to our
ancestors in all of this so the next
time somebody tells you that Andy Warhol
led to Instagram and you can say yeah
that's true but he was in on the joke he
was also an amazingly porous artist who
was a vessel for all sorts of media that
helped him process his time and work
which has stood the test of time so here
we are again only more so with more
immersive media more interconnected
change and time yet
just lit mines wide open so thank you
for coming
[Applause]